# Pthreads
The big picture is that threads and all of other matching technologies are abstraction provided by the OS to facilitate the resource management. When a thread or a mutex is freed, it is making system call under the hood to ask the OS the collect these resources.

## Process vs. Threads

| Process                              | Thread                |
| ------------------------------------ | --------------------- |
| 1. pid, group pid, user id, group id | stack pointer         |
| 2. environment                       | registers             |
| 3. working directory                 | scheduling priorities |
| 4. instructions                      | signals               |
| 5. memory space                      | thread specific data  |
| 6. fd                                |                       |
| 7. signals                           |                       |


## How to design and what to consider?
Parallel programming models:
- manager / worker
    - dynamic worker pool
    - static worker pool
- pipeline
- peer

All threads within the same process share the same global shared resources.
Thread also has their own private data. Programmers are responsible for synchronizing data access and globally shared data.

**Thread safeness**: the application's ability to execute multiple threads without clobbing the data and create race conditions.

**Thread limit**: not specified by POSIX. Things to consider: thread stack size, total memory.

## Pthreads API
- thread management: creating, detach, join. set and query thread attributes
- mutex: deal with mutual exclusion, creating, destroying, locking, unlocking
- condition variables: used for communication between threads that shares are   mutex.
- synchronization: read / write lock, barrier etc

| prefix of routines   | function group                |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `pthread_`           | threads, misc                 |
| `pthread_attr_`      | thread attributes             |
| `pthread_mutex_`     | mutex                         |
| `pthread_mutexattr_` | mutex attributes              |
| `pthread_cond_`      | condition variables           |
| `pthread_condattr_`  | condition variable attributes |
| `pthread_key_`       | thread specific data keys     |
| `pthread_rwlock_`    | read / write locks            |
| `pthread_barrier_`   | synchronization barrier       |

### creating and terminating
```c
pthread_create(pthread_t* thread, const pthread_attr_t* attr, \ void*(*start_routine(void*)), void* arg);
```

- thread: pointer to the thread
- attr: pointer to attributes to initialize the thread, use `NULL` if accept default
- start_routine: function pointer to the routine to run in the thread
- arg: a single argument passed to start routine. to pass multiple args, create an arg struct instead.

thread can create other threads, but there's no hierachy or dependency implied.

other routine:
- `pthread_exit(status)`
- `pthread_cancel(thread)`
- `pthread_attr_init(attr)`
- `pthread_attr_destroy(attr)`

`ulimit` for querying operating system resource limits (bash(1))

### thread attributes
- detached, joinable
- scheduling priority
- scheduling inheritance
- scheduling parameters
- stack size
- stack address
- stack guard overflow size
- etc..

routines:

`pthread_attr_init(pthread_attr_t* attr)` initialize `attr` with default values, trying to initialize an initialized attr object results in UB.

`pthread_attr_destroy(pthread_attr_t* attr)` destroy an attr. A attr should be destroyed once it is no longer needed. Re-destroy -> UB.

### thread binding and scheduling
usually not needed, a strong and robust program should not depend on the specific order of thread execution. However, if it is indeed needed, there's also routine for this. e.g. `sched_setscheduler`

### thread terminating and exiting
- thread routine is finished, thread exits normally
- thread calls `thread_exit`
- thread terminated by other thread calling `thread_cancel` on it
- the entire process is terminated (`exec` or `exit`)
- `main` finishes without calling

`pthread_exit(void* retval)`,
- retval is then available in the thread which joins the exiting thread.
- Doesn't close files, fd's are still open after thread is terminated.
- if called from `main`, main thread will be blocked until all threads are terminated


### Join and detaching
`pthread_join`: blocks the joining thread until joined thread terminates
Don't join the same thread in multiple threads (logical error and UB)

joinable is an attribute of a pthread. only joinable threads can be joined. If a thread is detached, it can never be joined.
`pthread_attr_init` -> `pthread_attr_setdetachstate` -> use it -> `pthread_attr_destroy`

`pthread_detach`. what is **detach**? you don't need to care how it ended after it is created. If you are sure about this, declare the thread as detached state for some resources can be freed after it terminates. UB if detach a detached thread.


### stack management

Thread's stack size is not mandated by POSIX standard. hence it is implementation defined. Robust program should not depend on the default stack size, but set the stack size explicitly
`pthread_attr_getstacksize` and `pthread_attr_setstacksize`


### Other routines
- `pthread_self()`: return `pthread_t` of the calling thread
- `pthread_equal(pthread_t a, pthread_t b)`: compare `pthread_t`, if equal 0 is returned
- `pthread_once(once_control, init_routine)`: of all the threads in the current process, the first call to `pthread_once` executes `init_routine` exactly once. Consecutive calling is no-op. (guess: static variable)
    - `once_control`: `pthread_once_t once = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT;`