# Concurrency

There're mainly three concurrency primitives in Linux world, mutex, condition variable and semaphore.

## Mutex
A mutex is a mutual exclusion **device**, quote from man page.
Only one thread can lock (or own) a mutex variable at any given time. When the owning thread exit, it must **unlock** the mutex first (error-prone code).

### Procedure
- create and initialize mutex variable
- share it among a few threads
- only one succeed and the rest blocking
- the mutex owner enters critical section
- the owner unlock the mutex
- another thread waiting gets ownership
- finish, destroy the mutex


### API
types
- `pthread_mutex_t`
- `pthread_mutexattr_t`

#### Creating mutex

Mutex is initially unlocked. In general, there're two ways to initialize a mutex, static with `PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER` or dynamic with attributes (like creating threads).

- `pthread_mutex_init(mutex, attr)`
- `pthread_mutex_destroy(mutex)`
- `pthread_mutexattr_init(attr)`
- `pthread_mutexattr_destroy(attr)`

#### Locking and unlocking mutex

- `pthread_mutex_lock`
- `pthread_mutex_trylock`
- `pthread_mutex_unlock`


## Condition Variable
A condition variable is a synchronizing device exposed by the OS. There're two basic operations. **wait** and **signal**.
- signal: when the condition is true, let waiting threads know.
- wait: wait for the condition, suspend the current thread until condition is signaled.

### API
Structs:
- `pthread_cond_t`: condition variable
- `pthread_condattr_t`: no meaningful usage in Linux

Routines:
- `pthread_cond_wait`
- `pthread_cond_timedwait`
- `pthread_cond_signal`
- `pthread_cond_broadcast`
- `pthread_cond_destroy`

### Usage
A condition variable must be used **together** with a mutex. (A waits for the condition, while B signals it. A will never receive the signal).
- `pthread_cond_wait(pthread_cond_t *cond, pthread_mutex_t* mutex)` takes two arguments, a condition variable and a mutex.
    - lock mutex `pthread_mutex_lock(mutex)`
    - wait for condition variable `pthread_cond_wait(cond, mutex)`
        - suspend if not met, and unlock the mutex
        - wake up when signaled, lock the mutex (automatically and atomically)
    - continue excecution on critical section
- `pthread_cond_signal`: restart one of the threads waiting for the condition varialbe, OS sched determines which. If no thread is waiting, nothing happens.
- `pthread_cond_broadcast`: restart all the threads waiting. could lead to G

### Benefits
of using condition variable instead of spinlock is that when a thread is waiting for a condition variable, it is consuming no CPU resource.

### Example
Main thread: create variables
```cpp
pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;
pthread_mutex_t mut = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
```

Thread A: waiting for the condition `x > y` to be met. Because there could many threads waiting for the same cond var, after thread B broadcast the condvar, another thread C could take the mutex first and make the condition nolonger met again, hence this while loop.
```cpp
pthread_mutex_lock(&mut);

while (x <= y) {
    pthread_cond_wait(&cond, &mut);
}
/* operate on x and y */
pthread_mutex_unlock(&mut);
```

Thread B: modify `x` and `y`
```cpp
pthread_mutex_lock(&mut);
// do someting on x and y
if (x > y)
    pthread_cond_broadcast(&cond);
pthread_mutex_unlock(&mut);
// here mutex is unlocked, thread A is waken up and competing for this mutex
// through pthread_cond_wait
```

TIPS: `pthread_create` takes a `void*` as it argument which could be used as passing the thread id since pointers are actually of long type. As long as `void*` is not dereferenced.